---
title: "HTTP Header Field Manipulation"
short_description: "This test tries to detect the presence of network components (“middle box”)
which could be responsible for censorship and/or traffic manipulation."
groups: ["boxes"]
---

This test tries to detect the presence of network components (“middle box”)
which could be responsible for censorship and/or traffic manipulation.

HTTP is a protocol which transfers or exchanges data across the internet. It
does so by handling a client's request to connect to a server, and a server's
response to a client's request. Every time you connect to a server, you (the
client) send a request through the HTTP protocol to that server. Such requests
include “HTTP headers”, which transmit various types of information, including
your device's operating system and the type of browser that it's using. If you
are using Firefox on Windows, for example, the “user agent header” in your HTTP
request will tell the server that you're using a Firefox browser on a Windows
operating system.

This test emulates an HTTP request towards a server, but sends HTTP headers that
have variations in capitalization. In other words, this test sends HTTP requests
which include valid, but non-canonical HTTP headers. Such requests are sent to a
backend control server which sends back any data it receives. If we receive the
HTTP headers exactly as we sent them, then we assume that there is no “middle
box” in the network which could be responsible for censorship, surveillance
and/or traffic manipulation. If, however, such software is present in the
network that we are testing, it will likely normalize the invalid headers that
we are sending or add extra headers.

Depending on whether the HTTP headers that we send and receive from a backend
control server are the same or not, we are able to evaluate whether software –
which could be responsible for traffic manipulation – is present in the network
that we are testing.

**Note:** A false negative could potentially occur in the hypothetical instance
that ISPs are using highly sophisticated software that is specifically designed
to not interfere with HTTP headers when it receives them. Furthermore, the
presence of a middle box is not necessarily indicative of traffic manipulation,
as they are often used in networks for caching purposes.

Read the **[HTTP Header Field Manipulation test specification](https://github.com/ooni/spec/blob/master/nettests/ts-006-header-field-manipulation.md)**.
